Good morning,
and welcome to the Kernel Programming
Interfaces for Extension sessions.
I'm Craig Keithley.
I'm the I/O Technology Evangelist
in Apple's Worldwide
Developer Relations Group.
As the I/O Technology Evangelist,
I work with a lot of Kecks developers,
and over the past couple of years,
we've faced some challenges with regard
to making sure that we have a set
of consistent APIs that will remain
useful through the life of a product.
So we've now looked at
providing what's known as KPIs,
or Kernel Programming Interfaces.
To talk about that, Simon Patience,
Director of Engineering.
Good morning.
So let's briefly describe what's
going to be covered today.
First of all,
we'll go through a definition of
rationale of kernel interfaces,
and where we're gonna be taking them
over the course of the next year or so.
We'll be looking at how we're
going to be managing the version
progressions as we evolve them.
We'll have a look at
the effects on I/O Kit.
We'll cover general kernel interfaces
and the file system interfaces.
Then we'll have a look at some networking
interfaces for kernel extensions,
and then we'll sum up, and then Q&A.
So KPI's, so what are they?
Well,
obviously kernel programming interfaces,
there's obviously a relationship
between those and API's,
just in the same way that in libraries
there's a whole lot of functions,
but you don't actually get
to program to them all.
We're using that kind of
analogy here for the kernel.
The sets of well-defined
interfaces are bounded,
as I mentioned.
They cover both functions
that the kernel provides,
but also the rules by
which you can access data.
The sets are versioned.
As we move through time,
we will be evolving these interfaces.
Some will be changing,
some will be being added.
And the reasons that they're versioned
is because they really reflect
the implementation rather than
the interface as the system moves on.
And we want to have a well-defined
lifecycle so that you know
what's coming and what to
We're currently targeting specific
classes of kernel extensions.
We will be adding new
classes as there is demand,
and as we can identify what the
correct interfaces for those will be.
So let's have a look at one of the
motivating factors that we have
for putting in kernel interfaces,
which is what we could describe
as the Keck dependency problem.
So here's a picture of the OS X kernel.
There's a picture of your KEXT.
As you load it,
let's say it's a networking KEXT.
There's a set of interfaces which we
can clearly see you're dependent on,
because those are the
unresolved symbols in your KEXT.
The big problem for us
is that we have no idea,
especially if you're going through data,
what these additional
implicit dependencies are,
and so we cannot define what
the compatibility points are
that your KEXT is depending on.
So,
why do we need these kernel interfaces?
Well, as I just mentioned,
KEX have no explicit dependencies,
not a total set of explicit dependencies.
We cannot work out exactly what
it is that we can't change.
And OS X needs to evolve.
There's a whole set of reasons
why we need to change the kernel.
We have new features that we're coming
in to provide a better user experience.
We have performance
improvements that we need to do.
There are bug fixes, obviously.
We try to limit the number of
bugs that we have in the system,
but they do occur from time to time,
and we need to be able to fix
those in ways that don't break
binary compatibility for KEX.
Clearly, there's new hardware,
such as the hardware
that was announced today,
this week.
I mean, that takes a certain amount
of change in the kernel,
and has ramifications on KEX,
if there are no boundaries.
And, SMP support.
The funnels are well-known
within the system,
and we need to do something about
them to get better SMP performance.
And so, without these interfaces,
this really makes change within the
kernel very difficult to achieve.
So, these interfaces define what I like
to call our innovation sandbox.
So why would developers
want kernel interfaces?
Well, first of all,
it means that we can have a
set of interfaces that are
best suited for your needs.
We can design them such that they perform
the functions that you're trying to
achieve in the most efficient manner.
We can improve the stability
of the environment,
and we can provide binary
compatibility from release to
release for these interfaces.
and they've significantly reduced
the chance of us changing things that
unbeknownst to us is breaking your KEXT,
because we can now test those
interfaces and ensure that they
are semantically and syntactically
equivalent from release to release.
So we have a number of states,
just to let you know exactly where
the status of this interface is.
We have defined four states.
The stable interface,
these are basically the things
that you've seen in the kernel,
and the general stuff,
all the libc functions, for example,
stuff like that.
They're not going away,
and they're guaranteed to be
in the next major release,
and so you can rely on
those in your products.
Compatibility interfaces are basically
the same as stable interfaces
in terms of their longevity.
The difference is the fact that
we're trying to mark them specially
because they are there for porting
from one system to another,
and they may not necessarily be the
most efficient interface to use.
So we don't want to mix them
in with the stable interfaces.
We want to indicate which
ones are the ones that you
should really be going towards.
When we decide that an interface
has to change or go away for
various implementation reasons,
then we'll mark it as being deprecated.
This means that the interface is going
to be removed or is planned to be
removed in the following major release.
And finally, we have another set,
which is called evolving.
What is evolving?
These interfaces are under development,
and normally under development with you.
This is in order to be able to support
new kinds of KEX that we don't really
know what the right interface is,
and we would like to work with
you in order to be able to develop
the best set of interfaces,
both for your purposes and for ours.
So when are we going to be doing this?
Well, the draft specification for these
interfaces is available now.
We'll be giving you information about
how to get hold of them later on.
This is really just the
interface specifications.
The implementation for those will
be coming in the Panther timeframe.
And during Panther, as the system evolves
in the Panther updates,
we'll be also evolving these interfaces
and the implementations of them,
so that you can track them to see
how we're adding to them and evolving
them so that they become something
that we can actually make stable
and say that we can live behind.
The first set of stable
interfaces will be declared
with enough time before Panther,
so that you can actually port to them and
make sure that you are in a stable place
by the time the next release comes out,
the post-Panther major release comes out,
where we will start to
enforce these interfaces.
And with that,
I'd like to hand over to Dean Reece,
who's the Engineering Manager of
the I/O Kit team,
who will talk about how we're going to
manage the versions of these interfaces.
Thanks Simon, good morning.
I'm going to be talking a bit about the
KEXT system and how we're going to manage
the KPIs that Simon just talked about.
So let's get right into it.
For Panther,
the KEXT tools have not really changed.
As you recall, for Jaguar,
we totally revved the entire
set of kernel extension
management and development tools.
Pretty much got them where
we wanted them to be,
so for Panther,
we didn't really change them.
We have, however,
added some new capabilities to support
the kernel programming interfaces.
Basically,
we've created a new type of KEXT.
It's not something that you're
going to be needing to use directly.
We're going to provide them.
You'll link against them.
It'll be pretty much transparent,
and I'm going to talk about
that in the next few slides.
But the fundamental
change that you'll notice,
and again, it shouldn't really cause
any code changes for you,
is that right now,
your KEXTs link directly
against the kernel.
And in Panther and beyond,
they will link indirectly
against the kernel.
I've got some diagrams
to show how that works.
works.
So in Jaguar,
if you list a dependency for
your text on any of these
CFBundle identifiers here listed in blue,
then you're saying that
you need the kernel.
And because of the way that we did
the linking for kernel extensions,
if you said you needed
something from BSD,
then you actually got the
entire set of kernel symbols.
So you could have a dependency over an
I/O Kit that you didn't actually declare,
and it would actually work.
But the linking would succeed
because you were getting the whole
kernel and all the symbols in it.
Obviously,
as we're trying to move towards
an enforced interface design,
we can't have this.
We have to have a little bit
more partitioning between the
different programming interfaces.
For all versions prior to 7.0,
this is true.
If you link against one of these,
you get all of them for free.
This is what it looks like,
sort of in a pictorial form.
Basically,
all of the sub-identifiers for the
kernel represented the whole kernel,
and no matter which one you linked on,
you got the whole kernel.
So in Panther, we're going to provide
binary compatibility through
a set of interface keks,
the new type of keks I talked about.
And basically all they
contain is a set of symbols.
They're basically re-exporting
the symbols from the kernel.
But they only export the set of
symbols that you should be using
for whatever version you wanted.
Basically what we're doing is taking
all of the symbols that shipped in,
all the versions of Jaguar,
for all of the com.apple.kernel
bundle identifiers,
and we're putting them together
in one big interface KEXT.
And if you list a
dependency on one of those,
a version prior to 7.0,
then you're going to
get that interface KEXT,
and you'll get all the
symbols that you got before,
modulo a few that we had to take
out to support the new G5 hardware.
Basically, you're going to get exactly
what you got before.
It should just come up and work.
Yeah, let's move on and look at a
picture of how this looks.
So, in this case,
your KEXT in orange there is linking
against the BSD interface KEXT,
which supports compatibility,
everything from version
1.1 up through version 6.0.
Actually,
I think we've made that up through 6.9,
just to give us some leeway there.
And that, in turn,
links against the actual kernel,
the actual running kernel,
and that sort of provides the filter
to give you the correct set of symbols
for the version that you've asked for.
So we're also going to provide a new set
of kernel interface KEXTs for Panther.
These are going to be
version number seven.
So they're going to contain all
the symbols that we believe we
should support carrying forward.
We're going to remove a large number of
symbols that are sort of internal support
functions that really shouldn't have
ever been exported in the first place.
And we're also going to add the
new functionality that we've
introduced in Panther there.
So basically,
if you've got a kernel extension
that you've been shipping,
it'll continue to run in link in
Panther because it'll link against
the older version one through version
six compatibility interface KEXTs.
And if you've got a brand new
kernel extension that needs to take
advantage of new functionality,
then you use the new set.
Okay, and this picture looks exactly
like the picture before,
the only thing that's changed
is the version numbers.
You'll see everything
across the board is 7.0.
Now, we still provide a capability in
Panther that we provided in Jaguar,
and that is you can still link
directly against the kernel.
It's necessary, in fact,
as an implementation detail.
Our interface keks link
directly against the kernel,
and they actually play by the
same rules that your keks do.
So, if you select com.apple.kernel
as the dependency,
you will still get all of the
symbols exported by the kernel.
Now, we don't guarantee any
release-to-release compatibility with
the global set of symbol kernels,
because we can't, as Simon said,
unless we have some enforcement
and partitioning here,
we can't guarantee you compatibility,
because we can't know what
exactly you've used out of
that large mass of interfaces.
So, what we do,
every time we ship a new kernel,
it gets a new version number,
as it should.
And if you list a
dependency on the kernel,
you must list a dependency on
an exact version of the kernel.
The implication being that the
next time we ship a software
update with a new kernel in it,
your kernel extension will not
load on that version of the OS,
or the next major version as well.
So, this is really not a
good way to ship product.
It's useful in,
say with open source projects,
where you're shipping source code,
and the client can recompile for whatever
version of the OS they want to use,
or maybe in educational
institutions where you're working
on a particular OS for a class.
But, I thought I would point it out,
it is still a possibility,
it just isn't something you would
really want to do as part of a product.
and that's what that looks like.
Basically you're bypassing all
of the compatibility interfaces,
and you're linking straight
against the kernel.
And again here you'll notice
the dependency version listed
in the KEXT is identical to the
version of the kernel listed,
otherwise the linkage would fail.
So what does this mean
going beyond Panther?
Well, basically you'll continue to use
the same rules you used today.
We're introducing a new namespace,
actually not a new namespace,
a new naming convention within
the existing CFBundle Identifier
namespace that we already use.
And that is com.apple.kpi.
You'll see this in the Panther seed
CD that we've given out this week,
and you'll see it more going forward.
So com.apple.kernel will still be around,
and will represent the
compatibility interfaces.
com.apple.kpi will be used
going forward to present the
new supportable interfaces,
and the two will coexist on
the system as much as possible.
We'll also use this mechanism to make
experimental interfaces available to you,
as we, over the life of Panther,
deliver newer updates to our KPI package.
We'll deliver that,
and that will introduce new
interface kecks to your system,
possibly a new kernel as well for
the implementation behind them,
but that'll partition them off
from the compatibility interfaces,
because, again,
the version numbers kind of
separate them into past and future.
Obviously, and again as Simon said,
as the kernel evolves,
we're going to need to deprecate APIs,
particularly initially as we
start to thin that set down to the
ones that we really can support.
KPIs allows us to do this because
we can have a version set that
we maintain as long as possible,
and then whenever point in time
it becomes impossible for us
to continue to support that,
we can remove them,
and it won't affect anybody who's
dependent on a different interface or
a different version of that interface.
It will only affect the people
needing the old version of
that particular interface.
So it really provides
us a sliding window,
or what I like to view it as sort of a
conveyor belt that's some length long,
and we introduce an interface,
and we can support it pretty
much as long as we want to,
but eventually we may have to move
off of it as we evolve the kernel.
Alright, so I'm also going to talk
a little bit this morning,
put on my I/O Kit manager hat,
and talk about how this Panther release
introduces new things for I/O Kit.
So the good news is,
the I/O Kit in Panther is
binary compatible with
what we shipped in Jaguar.
So the V6 versions of the interfaces
that we ship will continue to load your
I/O Kit keks from Jaguar on Panther,
and they should work.
Obviously there's always
a potential for bugs.
This is what you need to do,
is take the seed that we've given you,
try it out with your products,
make sure that they work.
Let us know if they don't.
But the expectation is that
properly written kernel extensions
for I/O kits should continue
to load and run on Panther.
We've also introduced a few
new interfaces for Panther.
Those are only available
in the V7 interface.
Again, a kex needing V6 shouldn't
need those interfaces.
And we've also deprecated
a few interfaces.
I think they've actually been marked
in the header files for a couple
years now as going to be deprecated.
Well, now we have a mechanism to
actually deprecate them,
so we're making use of that.
Alright, so the V7 interface that we
provide in Panther for I/O Kit,
it has a number of changes
to I/O Memory Descriptor.
As you can imagine,
being able to address greater
than 4 GB of memory has some
implications for the way drivers
deal with physical memory.
So, if you've used the abstractions for
I/O Memory Descriptor correctly,
you should not have any problem with
your driver continuing to work on those
machines and addressing large memory.
If you've gone directly to the
PMAP functions or other workarounds,
so that you've avoided Memory Descriptor,
then you probably won't
work on those machines.
So, you need to use Memory Descriptor.
We've added some convenience
functions listed down here:
I/O Mapped Read 8, 16, 32, 64.
Basically,
these allow you to do direct I/O to
your hardware without generating,
having to create new Memory Descriptors
just for your registers.
We've also removed a few from Panther V7,
from I/O Kit.
These are two classes,
I think there's another one on the list.
This is not a final list, obviously,
as Panther is not yet final.
But I/O Command Queue and
I/O Sync are two classes that were
introduced very early on in I/O Kit,
and were realized as not
supportable long term,
and I think they've been marked
as deprecated for quite a while.
Hopefully this shouldn't
affect any of you,
but again,
they will be present in the kernel,
but they'll only be available for
linking if you have a V6 dependency.
They'll just be absent
from the V7 dependency.
So with that,
I would like to introduce Mark Gorlinsky,
the manager of the kernel team at Apple.
And take it away, Mark.
Thank you for bringing my script with me.
So as a kernel manager,
it's my job to improve
the Mac OS X kernel and
maintain the stability,
scalability, and performance without
breaking binary compatibility.
Today we expose all
the kernel interfaces,
and so every bug fix we make,
every feature we add,
we risk the opportunity,
or we have the opportunity to
break binary compatibility.
So we needed a way to evolve the
Mac OS X kernel without breakage.
So, we need to move forward.
Today we used two funnels to address
the scalability of the MACWIS10 kernel,
but funnel contention has led to a
performance impact of MP systems.
To address this,
we're moving beyond the funnels.
We're going to be making the
VSD kernel thread-safe and
implementing fine-grain locking.
We will also be making extensive
changes to the kernel data structures,
which includes adding
reference and usage counts.
So kernel data structures
are going opaque,
and they'll be accessible
only through data accessors,
functional routines,
and convenience APIs.
We will also be exposing locking
protocols of the data structures,
where it leads to efficiency,
but otherwise we will be hiding the
locking details behind the interface.
All new interfaces will be MP safe.
This includes data accessors,
functional routines,
as well as convenience APIs.
Today the file system
block numbers are 32 bits.
As we move forward,
they're going to be going to 64 bit.
This is important for
large file system volumes.
Also, it will have an impact on all
interfaces that use block numbers.
File system vnode operations are
currently not symmetric with respect to
vnode locking and reference counting.
This makes the job of providing efficient
stackable file systems very difficult.
For example, operations such as vopclose
and vopgetatter are entered
without locks being held,
vnode locks.
Moving forward,
all vnode locking will be symmetric.
There are also many common
functions in the VFS layer
that the VFS layer should have,
that are currently replicated
by all the file systems.
To address this,
we are moving some of this
functionality into the VFS layer.
For example,
functionality like NFS export,
device alias checks,
will be moving into this area,
this layer.
Keep in mind that the goal
of these interfaces is to
allow the Mac OS X kernel
to evolve without breakage.
When we started this,
we took a look at our
own kernel interfaces,
we looked at our shipping file system
drivers and networking extensions.
We determined that drivers and ILCit
based extensions were in good shape,
so we decided to first address BSD file
systems and network extensions,
and we'll address other extensions later.
We considered only providing
interfaces that were reliable,
scalable, and could be implemented
without affecting compatibility
of the extensions.
This is our first round of
iterating on these interfaces.
We are expecting them to evolve,
and we look forward to your feedback.
Okay, this diagram gives you a
perspective as to where file system
extensions reside in the kernel.
As you can see,
file system operations are dispatched
through the VFS layer as a set of
VFS and VNode Operations.
Let's look at what other
interfaces they may use.
Okay, so like I said,
they are implemented as VFS and VNodeOps.
They also use Common C functions
and Kernel Support functions,
which every kernel extension can use.
They also utilize functions that
the BSD kernel extensions would use,
such as credentials for
authentication and process APIs.
They also utilize file system specific
interfaces for file data caching,
such as Buffer Cache and UBC.
Let's take a look at C functions here.
Thank you.
Okay, so the kernel provides a
subset of standard C functions,
such as string and memory manipulation.
As a kernel extension developer,
you should be aware that these
functions are not as fully featured
as their user layer libc counterparts.
Also, there's really no change
that's any significance here.
Kernel extensions will continue
to have access to all the standard
C functions that exist today.
Additionally,
there are kernel support interfaces,
That provide access to resource
management and thread control,
as well as memory management
routines such as malloc and free,
synchronization routines
like sleep and wake up,
routines to provide locking
using simple locks and mutexes,
which can be used by kernel
extensions to protect their data.
There are also routines
to do thread call out,
routines for data copy like copy in,
copy out, which will be changing to
support 64-bit addresses.
So far, the interfaces we've discussed
are relatively gone on change,
with the exception of
64-bit address support.
However,
as you'll see from this point on,
you'll see a significant
change in the interfaces.
Many kernel extension use routines that
are considered BSD kernel interfaces,
We are providing interfaces
for authentication and process
limits and process IDs.
For example, for a given process ID,
you can signal the process or you
can get a handle to the process,
but you should now be aware that
this handle is opaque and does not
point to the process struct directly.
and it comes with a reference count
that will have to be dropped later.
Also we are moving towards
thread based credentials.
These credentials,
the credentials that are processed,
enters the syscall with, you know,
the thread enters the syscall actually,
will be stored in a
thread local data area,
so it can be accessed
quickly without contention.
We will also be providing interfaces
to obtain a reference V node or
socket through a file descriptor,
we will consider adding other
interfaces to things like file ops
and TTYs sometime in the future.
If you need access to
something that is not covered,
send us your feedback.
However, some interfaces,
we chose not to provide
interfaces at risk stability
and that are not sustainable.
For example,
direct access to the system call
table is not going to be provided.
In these cases,
you will have to work with us,
possibly find alternative mechanisms
or work with us so we can provide you
with a sustainable and stable mechanism.
File Caching These interfaces are mostly
used by file system kernel extensions
to do caching of meta and file data.
Both structbuf and
ubcinfo are going opaque.
All data structures are going opaque.
For buffer cache,
we have left the semantics
and usage the same,
but we have implemented new interfaces
to use 64-bit block numbers.
For example,
getblock is now called buff_getblock,
and it takes a 64-bit block number.
We have also left the
semantics of UBC the same,
except for the UBC macros,
such as UBC is invalid,
are now actually functions.
Otherwise,
we have maintained the same API,
but remember,
these structures are now opaque.
So, another example would be bwrite.
Instead of taking a struct buff,
it now takes a buff t.
Throughout all our efforts,
we've tried to maintain the
familiarity of the subsystem.
We didn't want you to have
to learn all new interfaces.
But we had to make changes to support
the opaqueness of the data structures
and for locking and reference counting.
If there's an interface, again,
that we missed, send us your feedback.
Okay.
VFS Ops.
VFS operations are already a
set of well-defined routines to
manipulate individual volumes
through a mount structure.
However,
the mount structure is now opaque,
and is called mount_t, mount_t.
This is the data type every
VFS operation will receive.
We are now providing new accessors,
accessor functions to
the mount structure.
For example, instead of testing mount_rd
only in the mount flags,
you would now use VFS is_rd only to check
the file system is mounted read only.
All mount flags that are visible
directly to user level will be exposed.
Additional functions will cover
access to other kernel mount flags.
Oop, I need to go back.
We have also added interfaces
like VFS Iterate to provide
access to VNodes on a given mount.
These are done in an MP Safe way.
We have renamed and modified
the StataFS structure.
It is now called VFS StataFS.
We have changed the block
number fields to 64-bit,
so we can support large
file system volumes.
We have expanded the path
names to max_path_length to
address localization issues.
We have created a new I/O attribute
structure called VFS I/O Atter.
Again, this is the structure that
contains IO attributes
associated with the map point,
but we have added some new
New information about the device
capabilities such as how many
bytes the device can actually
read and write at one time.
There are also new interfaces
to get and set these structures
within the mount structure.
Also,
we've added some new VFS operations to
support dynamic growth of a file system.
They are VFS Extend and VFS Truncate.
We have added VFS Uninit
to complement VFS Init.
We moved them both to file system
registration instead of VFS op.
We have untangled VFS mount
operations and defined new
VFS ops for update and reload.
This was done to keep the logic
and code clean and uncomplicated.
VFS operations are defined by a
structure with various function pointers.
We are changing this to be similar
to the way that VNode ops are done.
We will make VFF ops extensible so
that we don't have to worry about
breakage when we add new VFS ops.
Okay, VNode Ops,
VNode operations are a set
of well-defined routines to
manipulate individual files
through a VNode structure.
Again,
As in all the data structures,
VNode structure is now
opaque and is called VNodeT.
This will be the data type all
VNode operations will receive.
and we are also providing new
accessor functions for this structure.
We are making VNode operations
symmetric with respect to VNode locking,
and this does have an impact on
We have also modified the
VNode locks with respect to how
you manage your VNode locks.
We wanted to empower the file systems
to enforce the locking their way,
so now file systems don't have
to use the same locking rules
that VFS used to be enforcing.
So if a file system wants
to provide multi-reader,
single writer locks,
they will be able to do so
without having every file system
support the locking semantics.
We have also modified the sequence
of events to create a VNode.
Instead of calling get new VNode,
and then associating the relevant
data and so on to the VNode structure,
You can now call vnode create,
which passes in all the relevant
information in one call.
and others.
The main thing is to make sure
that the kernel is fully structured
and has complete information.
In this way we avoid having to use
too many accessors to set all this up.
The side effect is you have the
ability to manage your own inode pool
without tying it to the vnode pool.
We are adding new functionality
to suspend and resume a VNode
and a mounted file system.
This can be used to acquiesce
an entire file system,
so we can make on-disk
manipulation changes.
Finally, there's a new VADDR structure
that's been updated to support
64-bit blocks called VNode VADDRT.
And I just want to
close with saying that,
again,
we are iterating on these interfaces,
and your feedback is going
to be very important to us.
Otherwise,
We consider the interfaces not complete
if you don't give us your feedback.
You get to help determine our
future and your own future as
to where these interfaces go.
That's it.
I'd like to introduce Josh Graessley,
who will be doing Network Extensions.
Hi, I'm going to be telling you about
the network kernel programming
interfaces that we've been working on.
We have six interfaces
we've been planning.
The mbuf socket, socket filter,
IP filter, interface filter,
and interface.
And here's a diagram of
the networking stack.
So at the top we have the sockets,
and between the sockets and the
protocols we have socket filters.
And attached to IP we have IP filters.
and down at the bottom we have interfaces
with interface filters attached to those.
All of the items in purple will be,
kernel extensions can
supply to the stack.
So, as a engineer that's been working
on the stack for quite a while,
I spend a lot of time tracking down bugs,
and I quite often run into
a bug that has a simple fix,
but the simple fix would end
up breaking a kernel extension.
So we end up with some pretty
innovative fixes in the kernel,
which we're getting a little...
we'd like to do better.
So one of our goals is to make
all of the data structures opaque,
so we can extend them when we need to.
We're going to change a lot of the
filters to be based on operations
instead of implementation.
As much of the implementation
as we can hide from you,
the better off we are,
because that lets us change it.
We'll modify a lot of the fun--
The new APIs return errors more
often than the old ones did.
So, for example,
instead of-- When you call mclget,
instead of checking a flag to determine
whether or not the call succeeded,
the call will just return
an error if it didn't work.
We're also looking at
additional interface sets.
We're looking at adding support
for new interface families,
as well as new protocols.
First KPI is the mbuf KPI.
All of the packets in the networking
stack are stored in mbufs.
The mbuf structure used to be
visible to kernel extensions,
but we're making a change.
The mbuf will be opaque,
and it will be referenced with an mbuf_t.
You'll be provided accessor functions
for allocating and manipulating mbufs,
as well as inspecting them and
getting to the data that they contain.
The naming of the new functions will
be consistent with the old functions,
so it should be pretty simple
to port most of your code.
For example, mtd becomes mbuf_mtd,
and m_freem becomes mbuf_freem.
Most of the functions
will return errors now.
MCL_GET is a great example of that.
It should make the code a
little bit less error prone.
Again, we have the network diagram,
the diagram of the stack,
and at the top we have the sockets,
and we will be providing
a socket interface,
or socket KPI to kernel extensions,
so they can make use of
sockets within the kernel.
Common use of this would
be a network file system.
The socket KPI will be provided
so they can perform all of their
network operations using this.
The KPI is based on the user space APIs.
To create a socket,
the kernel extension uses
sock underscore socket.
To bind to a specific address and port,
it uses sock underscore bind.
The socket and proto-SW
structures will now be opaque.
You will have no direct
access to these structures,
and the protocol control
block will also be hidden.
So you'll need to use things
such as get_sock_name,
get_peer_name,
and get_sock_opt to get access
to the information that's stored
in the protocol control blocks.
Between the sockets and the protocols,
we have socket filters.
Socket filters have been
completely rewritten.
They are now based on the operations,
instead of the implementation.
It lets you filter data and
commands at the socket layer.
You'll be able to receive
notification of changes,
of state changes to the socket.
For example,
you'll get a state change notification
when the socket goes from the
connecting state to the connected state.
You'll no longer be able to
intercept or prevent these changes.
We also allow you to specify
inbound and outbound data filters.
The inbound data filter
will pass data to you,
no matter how it comes in.
In the past,
you used to have to filter SBAppend,
SBAppend data, SBAppend control,
and a wide variety of similar things.
And there were some
other problems with that.
If you're filtering inbound data
and TCP input called SBAppend to
put the data in the socket buffer,
When, if your kernel extension
held onto the data,
so that it could later re-inject it,
and it returned, you just return,
SBA pin didn't actually have any
semantics to let the caller know
whether or not there was data
appended to the socket buffer.
So, TCP would go ahead and wake up the,
and the client who was
waiting on the socket.
The client would read, get 0 bytes read,
and it would think it was an end of
file and erroneously close the socket,
which would lead to lots
of strange problems.
So we have inbound and outbound
data filters that should just work,
and make things a lot simpler.
We also have inbound and
outbound connection filters.
So your inbound connection filter
is past the address that the
connection is coming in from,
and you'll have an
opportunity to refuse that.
In the case of TCP,
we'll actually send a reset,
if you refuse the connection.
So you could potentially build a firewall
using these filters at the socket layer,
instead of doing it at the packet layer.
We can also filter outbound connections,
so you can enforce stricter security.
You can also filter on binds
and get and set socket options,
as well as listen and di-octal.
Moving down the stack a little bit,
attached to the IP protocol,
we have IP filters.
The IP filters give you a place
to filter packets at the IP layer,
it's brand new.
You can filter inbound
and outbound packets,
and on the inbound side,
you get the packet after
it's been reassembled,
and after all of the media specific
headers have been stripped off.
You also get to filter both before and
after IPSec processing has occurred.
So if the packets are
encrypted and authenticated,
you'll get to see it both when it's
encrypted and after it's been decrypted.
And you'll get to see any credentials
or any authentication that's occurred.
On the outbound side,
you'll get to filter before
the packet's been fragmented,
and before
Before we apply the IPSec processing,
this will let you modify the data before
it gets encrypted and authenticated,
and inspect it before it's encrypted
and won't mean anything to you anymore.
The filters can be attached
to IPv4 as well as IPv6.
and moving down the stack further,
attached to the interfaces we have
interface filters that let you filter
packets at the interface layer.
The Network Interface Filter KPI provides
kernel extensions the ability to
attach these filters to interfaces.
The interface filters are based
on the DLL interface filters,
the difference being that
the types are all opaque.
You'll be able to filter inbound and
outbound packets on an interface,
as well as iOctyls to an interface,
and events coming from an interface.
and at the bottom of
the networking stack,
we have the interfaces themselves.
The Network Interface
KPI provides a number of things
you can do with the interfaces.
The interface is used to be
represented by IFNET structures.
The IFNET structure will now be opaque,
and you will get a reference to it.
The structure is reference counted,
and will provide accessors for inspecting
various properties of the interface,
as well as sending packets,
and performing I-Octols,
and other various operations.
We'll also give you functions
for getting a list of interfaces,
and finding a specific interface.
You'll also have the ability to
retrieve a list of addresses that
are attached to the interface,
as well as multicast addresses,
and you'll be able to
join and leave multicasts.
You'll also be able to add an interface,
but you'll only be able to add
an interface that belongs to
an existing interface family,
such as Ethernet, PPP, and FireWire.
And with that,
I'd like to bring Simon up for a summary.
So, obviously we can't go into huge
amounts of detail in the amount
of time that we've had available,
but I hope that's given you an indication
of the direction that we're going.
So to summarize,
the reason that we're doing
this is numerous actually,
it's to allow Apple to
innovate in the kernel,
to take the OS X kernel into the future
where the new hardware and the new
configurations are waiting and the
new functionality is waiting for us.
It allows us to improve
the quality of the kernel.
As was mentioned a couple of times,
there have been bug fixes where
we've actually found it difficult to
fix without breaking compatibility,
and somewhere it's
actually been impossible.
It allows developers to
write keks more easily.
You now don't have 100,000
interfaces to choose from,
many of which will be the wrong ones,
which you may not know at the time.
So now the programming interface
becomes a lot more clear as to
exactly how you can develop your keks.
We can provide some
future proofing for you.
We guarantee the compatibility of an
interface from release to release.
We actually have a much greater
chance of ensuring that that's
correct as we move forward,
because assuring the 100,000 interfaces
that are currently in the kernel,
including all the data usage
models that there may be,
is almost an impossible job.
With this, because of the state
transitions of interfaces,
we can provide a much more predictable
rate of change for developers.
We can guarantee that interfaces will
exist from one release to another.
We understand the contract,
and you understand the contract,
so we can give you a much
more predictable environment.
We also believe that this will
provide a better user experience
for when kecks become out of date,
and things do go wrong.
At the moment,
probably what will happen is
that the kecks will be loaded,
and then sometime later
the kernel will crash,
because there's some
incompatibility of data usage
between the kernel and your kecks.
So now it becomes much more apparent,
we actually catch it at load time,
that something has changed,
and this kecks is no longer
available to be used on this
particular rev of the system.
The other big thing is
that they start today.
Well, actually, perhaps not quite today,
because we don't have the interfaces
actually available on the web yet.
However, we will be getting them onto
the developer website very soon,
where you can download the
draft interface specifications.
You should look at developer.apple.com,
and there will be a new section,
I believe,
Craig will correct me if I'm wrong,
the new section there,
which will announce their availability,
and so keep your eyes on that space.
What we would like you to do is to review
the interfaces against your KEXTs to
tell us where we've not gone far enough,
or things that we're missing,
or actually whether
we've done a good job,
and that you're quite happy with them.
That's also very valuable information.
We'd like you to send us feedback.
There is an email address that you
can use that will come directly
through to us in engineering,
and we'll be monitoring
that very carefully,
so be gentle with us.
We will be continuing to update both the
header files containing the interfaces,
and the specifications of the interfaces,
and the implementation behind it,
so you should track the updates
for this and make sure that they're
going in the right direction.
Ultimately, when we actually have
the implementations,
we would like you to port your
KEX to use these interfaces,
and then give us your
feedback on your experiences.
Ultimately,
what we want to do in the release
after Panther is to actually
have these interfaces in place,
so we're very concerned
that we get this right.
We'd like you to work with us,
work with Apple,
to make this a success for everyone.
I mean, for a success for us,
so that we end up with a
kernel that we can develop in,
and make progress in, and support future
configurations and hardware,
and future functionality,
and make it a success for you,
that you can implement your KEX in a much
more reliable and predictable manner,
and a success for our user base,
where they now actually have much more
sensible things happening when the
kernel moves on and your KEX hasn't.
So with that, I'd like to just wrap up.
Here are some other
[Transcript missing]
Oh, you have them on the DVD, sorry.
So, Session 100,
the I/O Kit Kernel Extension Programming,
this actually was very interesting
about how you deal with
multi-threaded environments and
real-time priority environments.
The open source at Apple,
The Bluetooth update,
all these have passed, the USB update,
and the Firewire in depth.
The Darwin update was yesterday,
and the one today, this afternoon,
Firewire and USB,
that's a feedback session,
which I encourage you to attend.
So Craig Keithley is the person
that you need to talk to if
you're having trouble with this,
like you can't find the downloads.
[Transcript missing]
So we have some URLs that
you can refer to.
and the documentation you can
refer to inside the OS X kernel.
Kernel Programming.
These are all things on
the developer website.
and the ADC website.
I/O Kit Fundamentals, Device Drivers,
API Reference,
Kernel Extensions API Reference,
and these things are areas
where you could expect to,
that we will add to and
extend quite considerably as
we go through this process.